Title: Paul: Apostle of God's Glory in Christ
Date: 2012-06-28 07:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Book Reviews
Tags: academic theology, Books, God's glory, John Piper, Pauline theology, popular theology, Thomas R. Schreiner, Tullian Tchividjian
Slug: paul-apostle-gods-glory-christ

I read Schreiner’s Pauline theology ([<cite>Paul: Apostle of God’s Glory
in Christ – A Pauline Theology</cite>][]) over the course of six months,
so this is going to be less detailed and more interested in the broader
picture than some of my reviews.

### An overview: Pauline theology at its best

In the last couple years, I’ve started tackling theology aimed at a more
“academic” level and audience, as opposed to the popular-level theology
I had typically read before that. This has been helpful to me as I’ve
been more actively involved in teaching, especially in the last year or
so. However, I’m still just getting going – something that only becomes
more apparent as I read more. The sheer number of footnotes in
Schreiner’s book boggles the mind; and truth be told this book wasn’t
nearly as heavily footnoted as others. There is, as a wise man once
wrote, no end to the writing of books, and therefore to the reading
thereof as well. <!--more-->

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![Cover image: Paul, Apostle of God's Glory in Christ][]

</figure>
For the young theology student, this can be a bit daunting in some ways.
There are always more books being added to my wish list (not to mention
the piles accumulating in my home), and they’re increasingly challenging
in terms of length and style. They therefore require a great deal more
time and mental investment to really benefit from reading.

However, good books pay dividends that far outweigh the time necessary
to digest them well. This one fits into that category. I tackled it with
pencil in hand, and it received quite a few underlines and no few
comments in the margins. Schreiner has a great grasp on Paul’s theology
and indeed of the great themes of the New Testament, but he has also has
a way with words that I found eminently pleasant. He has a way of taking
a concept and repeating it half a dozen different ways in the space of
half a page. Ordinarily, this sort of repetition would simply grate, but
Schreiner’s grasp of English is good enough that instead it serves to
hammer the point home more effectively. Ofttimes, he stated points I’ve
believed for years, but clearly and succinctly and provocatively. He
thereby drove the truth home; he encouraged my faith. That’s no small
thing in an academic exploration of Paul’s theology, with the myriad
points of controversy that have sprung up over the Pauline corpus in the
past two centuries.

As for weak points, there are only a few. First, he treats a few topics
with more brevity than I could wish. At under 600 pages, this volume
still has plenty of room for expansion. Second, Schreiner does not seem
to fully grasp the Covenant argument for paedobaptism. While I’m a
credobaptist myself, I recognize that he gives short shrift to the
paedobaptist position, and in a form most covenant theologians would
neither recognize nor own. (Non-academic readers confused by these
terms, see [footnote 1][].) This is a perennial problem among Baptist
theologians, and I find it unfortunate indeed. Finally, I found it
interesting that he interacted almost entirely with only modern authors;
there is nary a mention of anyone before the 19th century, and not many
mentions of anyone before the last fifty years. This is a strength, too;
Schreiner is clearly aiming to engage the modern treatments of Paul, and
I think he succeeds admirably. However, I would be fascinated to see him
write another book that treated Pauline theology historically.

That’s a short list of weak points, and rightly so; this was an
excellent book. It is well worth your time… if, like me, you’re (a)
interested in academic theology, (b) pursuing ministry opportunities, or
(c) both. On the other hand, this isn’t a book I’d really recommend for
most of the people in the community group I lead. It’s dense, if well
written, and long. It’s academic in tone, though not stuffy; and
Schreiner of necessity heads off to cover fairly esoteric topics. In
other words, it would bore Jaimie out of her mind, and she probably
wouldn’t get a lot out of it – not for lack of ability, but for lack of
interest.

### On serious theology, and academic theology, and you

This highlights a point I’ve been chewing on for a couple years: the
difference between *robust* theology and *academic* theology. Everyone
should have the former, while the latter is more for those who want to
teach. (And those who want to teach do need to study; more on this in a
moment.) For the vast majority of believers, this book would be a waste
of their time. There are, as I noted just a few paragraphs ago, far more
books than any of us could read in a lifetime, and people really ought
to read the things that are most profitable for them.

That means serious theology, to be sure, and much of what passes for
Christian non-fiction is anything but serious. The need for serious
theology in the life of the believer does not demand reading these sorts
of academic tomes, though. It means getting down with books packed with
truth – not just little “life application” books, and especially not the
self-help tripe dressed up in Christian garb, but really good
explorations of what Scripture teaches. (It also means reading good
fiction – a post for another time.)

Teachers, however, have a higher responsibility. We need to know the
Scriptures deeply, and we need to unerstand how the pieces of the puzzle
fit together so that we can help others grow without stumbling into
error by dint of our own ignorance. If, as James says, we are subject to
a stricter judgment, then we need to take heed to our teaching, and that
means taking heed of our learning as well. It means dedicating ourselves
to studying broadly and deeply. Most men in pastoral ministry will not
have time to be experts on any theological topic at the academic level,
of course; but being conversant in academic theology is helpful on many
levels.

First, it works to sharpen the mind, which in turn helps us in our own
studies. Second, it helps us grasp Scripture’s teaching more clearly and
effectively. Third, it helps us deal with controversial or erroneous
teaching that will impact our churches one way or another. (Every heresy
that begins in academia touches the local church eventually; the
question is when and how, not if.) Fourth, it provides us with a base of
knowledge and a pool of resources to turn to when others come with hard
questions.

### Conclusion: worth the investment

Schreiner’s book was good for me. It will be helpful as I lead our small
group over the next six to seven months. It will be helpful background
as I work on other academic studies at Southeastern next year. It will
be there in the back of my mind in whatever ministerial roles God
entrusts to me in the years after. And, for most of you, it is probably
not worth reading. Instead, go get [<cite>Jesus + Nothing =
Everything</cite>][], or [<cite>Don’t Waste Your Life</cite>][] or any
number of other popular but serious theological books that will
challenge your faith and stir you up to love and good worsk, but not
leave you bored.

On the other hand, if you’re interested in ministry, or just love
academic theology, [pick this one up][<cite>Paul: Apostle of God’s Glory
in Christ – A Pauline Theology</cite>] and give it a go. Schreiner does
a great job tracing out Paul’s theology, and he does so in a way that
will be pastorally helpful as well as personally encouraging. You will
come away more full of the same passion that motivated Paul: God’s glory
in Jesus Christ, proclaimed to the nations.

* * * * *

<a name="fn1">^1^</a> Credobaptism is the view that only professing
believers should be baptized, while paedobaptism is the view that the
children of believing parents also ought to be baptized.
<a href="#fn1-ret">↑<?a ?>

  [<cite>Paul: Apostle of God’s Glory in Christ – A Pauline
  Theology</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0830828257/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=ardent-fidelity-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0830828257
  [Cover image: Paul, Apostle of God's Glory in Christ]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/theology/files/2012/06/schreiner_paul.jpeg
    "Cover image: Paul, Apostle of God's Glory in Christ"
  [footnote 1]: #fn1
  [<cite>Jesus + Nothing = Everything</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1433507781/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1433507781&linkCode=as2&tag=ardent-fidelity-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1433507781
  [<cite>Don’t Waste Your Life</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1581346107/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1581346107&linkCode=as2&tag=ardent-fidelity-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1581346107
