Title: The Return of the Shadow
Date: 2012-05-17 07:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Reflections
Tags: art, discipline, J. R. R. Tolkien, practice, The Lord of the Rings, writing
Slug: the-return-of-the-shadow

Tolkien was, unquestionably, a master of his art. There has never been
anyone quite like him - not before him, and not since. I have written
about this at some length [before][], and I suspect I will again.

In reading Christopher Tolkien's [<cite>The Return of the Shadow: The
History of The Lord of the Rings, Part I</cite>][], one salient point
about artistic endeavors came into sharp focus: Tolkien's remarkable
self-discipline and work ethic. He just kept at it. <!--more-->

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center;">
[![book cover image][]][<cite>The Return of the Shadow: The History of
The Lord of the Rings, Part I</cite>]

</figure>
The book explores J. R. R. Tolkien's work in drafting what became
<cite>The Fellowship of the Ring</cite>, up through the point where the
Fellowship reaches the tomb of Balin in the depths of Moria. When I say
"explores," I mean: provides, with detailed comments and explanations of
the process by Christopher Tolkien along the way.

Truth be told, I suspect most people would find this reading maddeningly
dull. I inherited my copy of the book from a friend who picked it up not
realizing exactly what it was - and, I believe, who never finished it.
Reading successive drafts of a novel most people *already* consider a
bit wordy or slow isn't for the faint of heart. For a fan like me,
however, it's fascinating - and equally so for someone continually
[intrigued by the artistic process][].

What quickly becomes apparent - and what should encourage every writer
who toils at his story and indeed every artist who struggles with her
work - is that the masterpiece that <cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite>
became was the result not only of genius but of incredibly hard work.
<cite>The Return of the Shadow</cite> sees the story turn from a
light-hearted sequel to <cite>The Hobbit</cite> to a darker, grander
tale. The scope of the world at least quadruples just in this first
phase of drafting; the characters are renamed and reshaped a half dozen
times; individuals that became central elements of the story do not even
make their appearance until the third draft. In some cases, they have
yet to appear by the stage of drafting this volume covers - well over a
year into the process of writing the book.

It is easy, looking back at a great work like <cite>The Lord of the
Rings</cite>, to mistake the real source of its genius. It is true that
Tolkien was a world-class thinker. His work on Old and Middle English
literature remains significant to this day in academic circles, and his
analysis of Beowulf remains one of the seminal works on the subject. Yet
his intellectual brilliance was not the sole or even necessarily the
primary component of his artistic genius.

Nor, surprisingly, was his remarkable imagination. Though Tolkien first
began imagining the world that became Middle Earth in scribbles in
notebooks while in the trenches in World War I, and let the fantastic
world flourish all the remaining decades of his life, his imagination
itself would not have finally created *The Lord of the Rings*, even when
coupled with his remarkable intelligence and breadth of knowledge,
without another crucial component: discipline.

Tolkien began working on <cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite> in 1937. The
end of what was published as <cite>The Return of the King</cite> was
finished in 1949 (though <cite>The Fellowship of the Ring</cite> was not
published until 1954). He worked on his masterpiece for over twelve
years. Twelve years.

Too many artists in every field think that mastery is possible without
enormous effort, that success comes to those with talent - and the more
so in a world saturated with YouTube hits and instant glamor for many
pop stars. The reality, though, is that lasting art is almost never
produced by undisciplined geniuses or remarkable talents who refuse to
labor away at their work.

Genius helps, of course. Much of the power and brilliance of the writing
in <cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite> is there from the first; Tolkien
had a better grasp on the English language and a better sense of
wordplay than most of us could ever hope to match. But that genius came
to fruition because Tolkien just kept at it, month after month and year
after year, until he was finally satisfied (mostly) with what he had
created.

The result stands over half a century later as the most popular,
best-selling novel ever written. Not just because Tolkien was smart or
talented, but because he set his face to the grindstone and kept at it
until it was good. Would that we were all so disciplined.

  [before]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/art/reflections/the-triumph-of-howard-shore/
    "The Triumph of Howard Shore"
  [<cite>The Return of the Shadow: The History of The Lord of the Rings,
  Part I</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/061808357X/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=ars-artis-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=061808357X
    "Get it at Amazon"
  [book cover image]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/art/files/2012/05/return_shadow.jpg
    "The Return of the Shadow"
  [intrigued by the artistic process]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/art/reflections/and-the-stew-tastes-good/
    "And the stew tastes good"
